Fix up the 'Templates' section (#2178)
elastic/docs-content: manage-data/data-store/templates.md

  - id: elasticsearch
---

# Templates [elasticsearch-templates]

> Templates are tools used to construct indices in {{es}}. They specify the properties that each created index will have.

Author: ```suggestion
Templates are the mechanism by which {{es}} applies settings, mappings, and other configurations when creating indices or data streams.
```

> You configure templates prior to creating indices. This way, when each index is created, either manually or through the indexing of a document, the template settings are used as a basis for creating the index. When used with a [data stream](/manage-data/data-store/data-streams.md), a template configures the stream's backing indices as they are created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You configure templates prior to creating indices or data streams. When an index is created, either manually or by indexing a document, the matching template determines the settings, mappings, and other configurations to apply. When used with a [data stream](/manage-data/data-store/data-streams.md), a template also defines how each backing index is configured as it is created.
```

There are two types of template:

> * An [**index template**](#index-templates) is used to configure indices when they are created, by specifying the mappings, settings, and aliases that each index inherits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An [**index template**](#index-templates) is the main configuration object applied when creating an index or data stream. It matches index names using `index_patterns` and resolves conflicts using a `priority` value. An index template can optionally define settings, mappings, and aliases directly, and refer to a list of component templates that provide reusable configuration blocks. It can also indicate whether it should create a data stream or a regular index.
```

Not sure.... maybe too long, but in the intro to index templates I think there's something important to highlight:
- is the component that has to match the index or data stream name
- it's used to determine if the item to create is a regular index or a data stream (for this we can just link to data streams documentation).
- can optionally include settings, mappings, and aliases, and refer to component templates.

The current description just puts the focus on mappings, settings and aliases, which is more aligned with the legacy templates and old way of working, without using composable templates.

Reviewer: Maybe you prefer something much shorter here and describe the points I mention later in the section dedicated to index templates. Whatever you prefer :)

Author: I like it!

> * A [**component template**](#component-templates) is a reusable building block used to construct index templates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A [**component template**](#component-templates) is a reusable building block that defines settings, mappings, and aliases. Component templates are not applied directly; they must be referenced by index templates.
```

> The following conditions apply to using templates:

Reviewer: Adding one sentence that can be the glue for what's coming next.

```suggestion
Together, index templates and their referenced component templates form what is known as *composable templates*.

The following conditions apply to using templates:
```

> * Composable index templates take precedence over legacy templates. If no composable template matches a given index, a legacy template may still match and be applied.

Reviewer: Can we add a link in `legacy templates`? The concept of legacy templates doesn't appear in the doc, and might be difficult for a reader to understand what's about.

Author: Thanks for providing that link. I changed this line to:

> Composable index templates take precedence over any [legacy templates](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/8.18/indices-templates-v1.html), which were deprecated in {{es}} 7.8.

* If an index is created with explicit settings and also matches an index template, the settings from the [create index](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-indices-create) request take precedence over settings specified in the index template and its component templates.
* Settings specified in the index template itself take precedence over the settings in its component templates.
* If a new data stream or index matches more than one index template, the index template with the highest priority is used.
* When you create an index template, be careful to avoid [naming pattern collisions](#avoid-index-pattern-collisions) with built-in {{es}} index templates.

:::{tip}
For a detailed exploration and examples of setting up composable templates, refer to the Elastic blog [Index templating in Elasticsearch: How to use composable templates](https://www.elastic.co/search-labs/blog/index-composable-templates).
:::

## Index templates [index-templates]

> An **index template** is used to configure an index when it is created. [Mappings](/manage-data/data-store/mapping.md), [settings](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/index-settings/index.md), and [aliases](/manage-data/data-store/aliases.md) specified in the index template are inherited by each created index. These can be specified directly in the index template, and they can be specified in one or more component templates used to construct the index template.

Author: Nice catch! Thank you.

* To avoid naming collisions with built-in and Fleet-managed index templates, avoid using `@` as part of the name of your own index templates.
* Beginning in {{stack}} version 9.1, {{fleet}} uses indices named `fleet-synced-integrations*` for a feature. Avoid using this name to avoid collisions with built-in indices.

## Component templates [component-templates]

> A **component template** is a reusable building block, containing mappings, settings, and aliases, used to construct an index template. Component templates are used only to construct index templates and are not applied to indices directly.

Reviewer: Used to construct index templates sound a bit weird when we want to mean that index templates include component templates to reuse their contents.

```suggestion
A **component template** is a reusable building block that defines mappings, settings, and aliases. Component templates are not applied directly to indices, but referenced by index templates and used when determining the final configuration of an index.
```
